# DSCI 525 Tutorial 1: Navigating Linux Command Line
###  Eric Lee 2024-02-27
------------------------------------


### Learning Objectives
- Define the functional units of the UNIX operating system
- Navigate a UNIX file system using the command line interface

### The Functional Units of the UNIX OS
The UNIX operating system (OS) is composed of mainly three parts: the kernel, the shell, and programs.

The kernel is a core program that allocates time and memory to programs. It handles the filestore and communications in response to system calls.

The shell is a command line interpreter (CLI), serving as an interface between the user and the kernel. It activates after an authentication procedure via the login program at the start of your command line interface. A commonly used shell is the Bourne Again Shell, also known as bash (the name comes from a pun).

In the UNIX system, the input commands are individual programs which act on the OS. Everything in this system is either a file or a process. A file is a collection of data, while a process is an executing program identified by a unique process identifier (PID).

To put this all into context, let's say we input a command:
```touch new_file.txt```
In response to this input, the shell first searches the filestore for the file containing the program `touch`. It then requests the kernel through system calls to execute the program. Note that a PID is assigned to this process. When the process is finished, the shell returns the prompt to the user for the next input.

### A List of Common UNIX Commands
With the background of UNIX being explained, let's walk through the following commands directly on your CLI. Note that UNIX is case sensitive: 'CD' is not the same as 'cd'.

0. Print: `echo TEXT`

1. Print working directory: `pwd`

2. Make a directory: `mkdir DIR`

3. Remove directory: `rmdir DIR`

    - recursive: `-r`
    - force: `-f`

4. Changing a directory: `cd DIR`
    
    - home directory: `~`    
    - current directory: `.`
    - parent of the current directory: `..`

5. Listing the contents of your current working directory: `ls`

    - all: `-a`
    - long: `-l`
    - sort by last access: `-u`
    - one file per line: `-1`
    - wildcard: `*`
    - unknown single character: `?`

6. Opening text editor: `vim`

7. Create an empty file: `touch FILE1`

8. Display contents of a file: `cat FILE1`

9. Redirect stdout to a file: `echo TEXT > FILE1`

10. Append to a file: `echo TEXT >> FILE1`

11. Join two files together: `cat FILE1 FILE2 > FILE3`

12. Copy as: `cp FILE1 FILE2`, `cp DIR1 DIR2`

13. Move as: `mv FILE1 FILE2`, `mv DIR1 DIR2`

14. Remove: `rm FILE1`
    
    - recursive: `-r`
    - force: `-f`

15. Display first ten lines of a file: `head FILE1`

16. Display last ten lines of a file: `tail FILE1`

17. Display contents of a file in batches: `less FILE1`
    - Find patterns by: `/ PATTERN`

18. Search for pattern in a file: `grep PATTERN FILE1`

    - display lines with no match: `-v`
    - precede each matching line with line number: `-n`
    - print only total count of matched lines: `-c`
    - ignore case: `-i`

19. Word count: `wc FILE1`

    - count number of lines: `-l`

20. Sort alphabetically/numerically: `sort FILE1`

21. Connect output of commands: `COMMAND FILE1 | COMMAND`
    - for instance, `cat FILE1 | sort`

22. Changing permissions for owner, groups, and others: `chmod ###`
    - for instance, `chmod 777`

23. Check space left on the file system: `df -h`

24. Check commands entered: `history`

25. Compressing files: `zip FILE1`

26. Decompressing files: `unzip FILE1`

27. Ending a process: `CTRL-C`

28. Wipe the current screen: `clear`
    - press up and down to go through previous commands

### Quiz!
1. How to count the number of files in a directory?
    - Try listing each file in a line then count the number of lines?

2. How to print only the third and the fourth line of the file?
    - Try reading the file, then print the last two lines of the first five lines?


### Conclusion
This tutorial provides a fundamental understanding of the functional units of the UNIX OS as well as a list of basic commands useful for navigating a UNIX OS. Knowing how to work with commands can be extremely useful when processing and analyzing data, especially in cases where the use of a graphical user interface (GUI) is not possible. This is an important skill in fields such as informatics.

Other CLI commands pertaining to GIT, such as `git clone`, or those from software, such as `docker` are not covered here. Additional resources can be found in their respective documentations.